The Treasury of the Four Activities: A Fire Offering for the Female Awareness-Holder (Rigdzin
Yumka) Practice
From the Longchen Nyingtik revelation of Jigme Lingpa

dorjé ying kyi khandro la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Ḍākinī of the vajra sphere!
This practice of fire offering to the ḍākinī is intended primarily for those wishing to gather
the two accumulations and purify breakages of samaya, but it can also be used for other
types of enlightened activity.
First, the material ingredients to be assembled are as follows: melted butter, firewood, white
and black sesame seeds, the three white substances and three sweet substances, curds sprinkled
with scented water, unhusked grain, rice, barley, wheat, grains of corn, mustard seed,
kuśa grass, dūrvā grass, fruit, pieces of coloured silk, various medicinal substances,
and precious stones. In particular, if you can obtain the meat of a red cow that is supreme.
If this is unavailable then it is fine to use the meat of a young ox anointed with amṛta
nectar. You should also collect some pieces of ‘fire cloth’, the colour of which will
correspond to the activity.
Second, to setting up the hearth, the Yumka practitioner should prepare some purifying water
with the ‘Amṛtakuṇḍali mantra’ [i.e. OM VAJRA AMṚTA KUṆḌALI HANA HANA HŪṂ PHAṬ]. If the ground
has not been consecrated then perform an earth ritual (sa chog). Then, with moisture
on a smooth support, mark out a three-stage drawing with coloured sand, with a dark blue
BAṂ at the centre. Outside this, on four petals with colours corresponding to their direction,
draw HA RI NI and SA, the life-force of countless hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs. Outside
this there is the vajra fence and ring of light, upon which you should pile a moderate
amount of good quality firewood, which is suitable for us as an offering substance. Place
an offering torma, some tsok and the fire offering substances at a convenient place nearby.
Third, there are the stages of the actual practice, beginning with sprinkling purificatory water,
purifying with AMṚTA...etc., and continuing with:
tongpé ngang lé chödzé sekdzé nam rang rang gi ming yik dangpo tiklé gyenpa lé jungwé dütsi
ngöpo lé tamché la tokpa mepar kul shying lhatsok nam gyepa kangwé nüden du gyur
Out of the state of emptiness arise the offering ingredients and from the first letter of their
names, each decorated with a bindu, come the nectar-like substances with the power to
delight the deities and to encourage them to act unobstructedly.
Cast the inner offering, and recite:
om ah hung ha ho hrih
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
seven times.
Light the fire to correspond to the activity rite and recite:
ah, chö nam rangshyin kyewa mé
Āh! All phenomena are naturally unarisen,
namkha ying kyi wangchukmé
In the expanse of the Lady Dhātviśvarī (space),
long na lé shyi dzokpé tab
Is the hearth for perfecting the four activities,
chen dang maki khaying su
In the spacious expanse of Buddhalocanā (earth) and Māmakī (water)
shyal chak pangpé melha ni
The fire god without faces or arms,
yumchen naza karmo nyi
The great consort Pāṇḍarāvasinī (fire).
damtsik drolmé tulshyuk dang
Her interaction with Samayatārā (wind)
nyamjor jinza barwé long
Creates the blazing expanse.
gyukyen lé dé shyalyé khang
The celestial palace is beyond cause and condition:1
tiklé nyakchik chöying go
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere2 of all-pervading space.
dechen barwé podrang ü
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
chukyé gesar shyepé teng
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
nyimé den la khandrö tso
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
chökü long na kunzangmo
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī,
longkü shying na varahi
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
tulku yeshe tsogyalma
And in nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
shyal chik chak nyi kudok mar
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
chermo nyampé dortab chen
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
shintu chak dang shyepé shyal
Passionate and smiling,
chak yé töpé chang te u
She holds in her right hand a small skull-drum,3
nyen gyi tekar tö ching trol
Which she plays at the level of her ear.
yönpa driguk yuwa ni
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
ku la ten né chok du gying
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
bhaga gyé shing numa bur
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
rinpoché dang shyönnü gyen
She is adorned with jewels and youth-ornaments;
pundariké doshal chang
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers.4
rüpé gyen druk ku la dzé
The six bone ornaments adorn her body,5
nak num utré lentsar chen
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
rinpoché yi tsédren ji
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
umé chen ni ying la zik
Her central eye gazes upwards into all-encompassing space.
longkü chen gyi drowa dul
Her right sambhogakāya eye gazes straight ahead and tames beings.
tulkü chen gyi kham sum guk
Her left nirmāṇakāya eye gazes downwards and summons the three realms.
ku la gyüdé kyilkhor dzok
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
bumtrak yangpé khandrö kor
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
rikdak pema tötreng tsal
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland.6
atsarya shyön karsal dzum
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
heruka pa chang dril trol
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
damtsik yeshe nyisu mé
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
gompa tsam gyi ngödrub tob
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
samaya
5. Invitation, with Devotional Mind
hung, yul gyi ming ni gyagar yul
Hūṃ! In the country known as India,
né kyi chokgyur urgyen né
In the supreme land of Oḍḍiyāna
dhumatala khandrö drong
Is Dhumathala, city of the ḍākinīs;
ling gi ling chok ngayab ling
Cāmaradvīpa, supreme island among islands.
dönla womin dechen shying
In reality they are the unexcelled great blissful pure land;
nampa khachö trulpé né
In appearance they are the manifested celestial realms.
gyé shing shyukpé yul kün né
From all those lands, wherever you dwell in delight,
chöku yum chen tsogyalma
The great dharmakāya mother Tsogyal,
bumtrak khandrö khor dang ché
Together with your retinue of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
Please approach and grant your blessings.
né chok diru jin pob la
Please bestow your blessings on this excellent place.
drub chok dak la wang shyi kur
Grant us excellent meditators the four empowerments,7
gek dang lokdren barché sol
Dispel hindrances, wrong guides and obstacles.
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
And bestow supreme and common attainments.
om ah hung benza jnana dakini é aralli pem pem dza
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra jñāna ḍākinī e aralli pheṃ pheṃ ja
6. Requesting the Deities to Be Seated and Homage
ho, dö né damtsik yeshepa
Ho! The samaya deity and wisdom deity,
nyisu mepa dorjé ten
Primordially indivisible, are the vajra seat.
khandro sem kyi chotrul du
The ḍākinī who is the miraculous manifestation of mind,
lhenchik kyé la chaktsal lo
Innate [wisdom], to you I pay homage.
namo nama hung
namo nama hūṃ
7. Offering of Sensory Objects
ho, nang shying sipé chö so chok
Ho! All phenomena that appear and exist
döyön nga yi gyen du shar
Arise as the ornaments of the five sense pleasures.
sem kyi yishyin ter chenpo
This great wish-fulfilling treasure of the mind,
langdor mepé gyé chö bul
We present as a delightful offering beyond acceptance and rejection.
benza jnana dakini pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta maha mudra rakta pentsa balingta sarva
pudza ah hung
vajra jñāna ḍākinī puṣpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda mahāmudrā rakta pañca baliṃ te sarva pūja
āḥ hūṃ
8. Praise and Aspiration
hung, gyalwa kün yum dorjé naljorma
Hūṃ! Vajrayoginī, mother of all the buddhas;
natsok yum gyur sherab parol chin
Prajñāpāramitā, the universal mother;
gyé chak shyepé namgyur tsogyal yum
Manifested as the mother Tsogyal, joyful, passionate and smiling;
sangye pemé cham la chaktsal tö
Consort of Buddha Padma(sambhava), to you I offer homage and praise.

tongwé yitrok tsenpé langtso chen
Your body is attractive, with youthful and auspicious marks and signs;
töpé namdrol gakmé da yi sung
Your speech liberates upon hearing, with ceaseless signs;
drenpé detong yeshe kyepé tuk
Your mind generates the wisdom of bliss and emptiness upon recollection;
daki jemo khar chen za la tö
Queen of the ḍākinīs, princess of Kharchen, to you I offer praise.

chudruk ga ter chok gi ponyamö
The supreme consort who bestows the sixteenfold bliss,8
sal nang gyumé tingdzin dang drokpé
By absorption in the meditation of your illusory clear vision,
chi nang shyen sum tsa lung tiklé kham
May the outer, inner and other,9 and the elements of channels, wind and essence
kuntuzangmö long du dak gyur chik
Be purified in the vast expanse of Samantabhadrī!
Take the filling and pouring implements and recite:
hung, gang luk kyilkhor malüpé
Hūṃ! The filler and pourer have the pure nature of
shyal gyi ngowo namdak ching
The mouths of all the deities of the maṇḍala.
dorjé jak teng hung yik gi
With the letters HŪṂ on their vajra tongues
sekdzé dütsi gyün drang né
They consume the offerings as a flow of nectar.
tukké dorjé pakmo nyé
Vajravārāhī at Yumka’s heart is pleased,
lé tün özer tröpa yi
And through the emanation of light rays [in colours] corresponding to the four activities
choktün ngödrub tobpar gyur
Supreme and ordinary siddhis are obtained.
om pemo yogini jnana varahi sarva papam shanting kuru soha
oṃ padmo yoginī jñāna vārāhī sarva pāpaṃ śāntiṃ kuru svāhā
Recite this seven times as you make the offering and then say:
naljorpa dak dang yön gyi dakpö né dön dik drib galkyen barchö sang ngak kyi chogé lhakché damtsik
nyamchak nyé tung ma dang khandrö kaché tamché shanting kuru soha
For this practitioner and for all my benefactors, may all illnesses, harmful influences, negative
actions, obscurations, adverse circumstances, obstacles, repetitions or omissions in
the rituals of secret mantra, impairments or breakages of samaya, downfalls and transgressions
of the ḍākinīs’ commands be pacified and purified—śāntiṃ kuru svāhā!
With this you request the fulfilment of wishes.
The other offering substances can be gathered together and offered in this way.
Should you wish to focus particularly on pacifying activity, the mantra to accumulate while
making the offerings would then be:
om pemo yogini jnana varahi sarva papam damtsik nyamchak shanting kuru soha
Likewise for enriching:
om pemo yogini jnana varahi sarva tsé dang sönam pushting kuru ho
For magnetizing:
om pemo yogini jnana varahi sarva kham sum kyegü la yi washam kuru ho
And for wrathful subjugation:
om pemo yogini jnana varahi sarva dra gek jungpo maraya pé
With regard to the substances, a large quantity of melted butter, white and black sesame seeds,
and padkha (mustard seed) may be used specifically for pacifying. Curds, durwa grass,
precious stones and fruit are used for enriching. Sweet and oily foods, flowers and red rice
are used for magnetizing. And for overcoming enemies and obstructing forces, offer mustard
seed, gugul and the three hot substances10 saturated with salt liquid.
The offering substances, burnt substances and hearth maṇḍala should be of the appropriate colours,
and, in particular, one’s samādhi should be directed accordingly.
When the offerings are exhausted, recite:
om benza wastra yé soha
oṃ vajra vastaye svāhā
As you offer the cloth,11 recite:
benza tam pulaya soha
vajra tāmbulāya svāhā
And offer betel.
Perform a gaṇacakra offering. Then, after the receiving of siddhis, offer a parting libation12
and continue with:
om, khyé kyi semchen dön kün dzö
Oṃ. Bring about the welfare of beings!
jesu tünpé ngödrub tsol
Grant us the appropriate attainments!
sangye yul du shek né kyang
And, having gone to the buddha realms,
lar yang jönpar dzé du sol
Come back to us again, we pray!
At the end, as you say ‘VAJRA MU’ the jñānasattvas all depart and you should consider that the
samayasattvas dissolve into you.
Dedication
khandroma yi kyilkhor du
Whatever virtue has been accumulated
jinsek chöpa di pulwé
Through this fire offering
gewé tsawa gang lakpa
In the maṇḍala of the ḍākinī
dro kün sangye tob chir ngo
I dedicate towards all beings’ enlightenment.
3 times
Aspiration
ho, nangsi tamché dakpa khachö shying
Ho! Where all that appears and exists is the pure celestial sphere,
dechen gyurmé dorjé naljorma
May we meet the Vajrayoginī of unchanging great bliss,
namkün chokden dön gyi pakmo dang
The ultimate Vajravārāhī endowed with all supreme attributes
rang shyal jal té ngönpar changchub shok
And attain complete enlightenment!
Recite verses of auspiciousness in the usual way.
The fire is the mouth of the maṇḍala deities. And so, since the offerings are consumed directly,
the practice of fire offering is supreme among meritorious acts.
When seeking to carry out activity that is sharp and swift, those who possess yoga should exert
themselves in this.
Samaya! Gya! Gya! Gya!
Following persistent prayers and requests made by Jetsün Paldingpa, the signs were decoded the
very next year.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2001. Revised with help from Gyurme Avertin and with additional
material translated by Han Kop, 2019.
↑ The remainder of this visualization section and the following four sections of the practice
are taken from the main sādhana.↑ Tib. tiklé nyakchik; thig le nyag gcig.↑ Tib. chang té'u↑
Skt. puṇḍarīka↑ The Illuminating the Meaning of Tantra: A Commentary on the Sādhana of
Yumka, the Queen of Great Bliss, by Ratön Ngawang Tendzin Dorje (in short called the Ratik
commentary), says these are: 1) a bone ring for the crown, 2) earrings, 3) a necklace, 4)
anklets and bracelets for the ankles, wrists and upper arms, 5) a girdle and 6) a sacred
Brahmanic thread.↑ Tib. Pema Tötreng Tsal, in other words, Padmasambhava↑ Vase, secret, wisdom
and word empowerments. [TT]↑ Bliss, supreme bliss, extraordinary bliss and innate bliss;
each divided into four makes sixteen.↑ Tulku Thondup says: “According to Ratik 'outer'
is the development stage, 'inner' is the completion stage with characteristics (perceptions),
and 'other' is the completion stage without characteristics. Rigdzin Zhalung has an
alternative interpretation: 'outer' is the geographical aspect of the world; 'inner' is the
aggregates, elements, senses and sense faculties; and 'other' is the mental phenomena of
beings.”↑ Possibly ginger, piper longum and black pepper.↑ "gos zung" here refers to the
cloths of five colours that are mentioned among the substances to prepare at the beginning
of the text (dar sna).↑ "byon skyems" here refers to a specific torma on which the practitioner
pours ghee or melted butter (mar khu), offering it to the fire as a parting gift.